# Project 2: Ames Housing Data and Kaggle Challenge
---




# Building a Price Prediction Model for Houses in Ames, Iowa

## Problem Statement



Heterogeneity in the housing market is often considered to be quite substantial as houses differ in size, location and quality, amongst other aspects. Home sellers often anchor their offer price to avoid underselling while home buyers, due to information asymmetry, often pay different prices for nearly identical houses. 

As a real estate brokerage firm, we aim to leverage on our market expertise and real estate data to help match prospective home sellers and buyers in Ames, Iowa. As a consultant in the business development team, I have been tasked to design a property price prediction model which can help our brokers provide useful insights and data-driven advice to prospective home sellers and buyers to aid them in their sale and purchase decisions.

The property price prediction model seeks to: 

1) Predict an estimated value of a house in Ames, given a set of housing features; and

2) Provide insights to home sellers on aspects of a home that home buyers are willing to pay for


### Problem Statement : 
How much should home sellers sell their house for? How much budget is sufficient to buy a house of one's liking? What aspects of a home are buyers willing to pay for?

## Executive Summary and Recommendations



### Methodology:

With a comprehensive 4 years of house sales in the Ames, Iowa, from 2006 to 2010, we have conducted data preparation, data cleaning, exploratory data analysis, and modelling to develop a property price prediction model of high accuracy. 

The missing data fields for some of the features were cleaned, imputed or dropped for the purpose of loading into the models. For example, missing data fields for 'Lot Frontage' were imputed with the mean values. 2 dimensionality reduction techniques were used to systematically reduce the number of features inputted into the models. Firstly, the collinearity of the features were analysed and those that have high-correlation with other features were dropped. Secondly, features with low variance, and hence being weaker price predictors were also dropped. 

Standard Scaler was applied to the dataset consisting of an exhaustive list of 127 housing features, before fitting onto the 3 regression models - Linear Regression, Lasso Regression and Ridge Regression. 

### Evaluation : 

Overall, we had selected **Lasso Regression** as our best model for deployment to predict the sale price after scoring and evaluating all 3 models. 

The testing dataset (25%) performed within expectations, returning an RMSE of 25961 which is only slightly lower than the training dataset's RMSE of 27064. 

This is a strong improvement over the baseline RMSE (79061) generated by using the mean of all sale prices as predictions. 

There is also a high R2 on our training (0.8835) and testing dataset (0.8921), where it can explain up to 88.35% and 89.21% of the variance in sale price of the fitted data. Since both R2 scores are quite close, the model is rather generalizable. 

The cross-validation scores for all 3 models are close and robust. Though the cross-validation scores for Lasso Regression (R2 = 0.8445, RMSE = 31108) is not the best, they were very close to the top-performing Ridge Regression(R2 = 0.8448, RMSE = 31027). Furthermore, Lasso Regression's cross-validation scores are also better than Linear Regression's (R2 = 0.8384, RMSE = 31558). 

### Recommendations : 

The property price prediction model can help provide a more data-driven advice to prospective home sellers and buyers. 

Besides predicting the estimated sale price, brokers can use insights from the model to advise home sellers that buyers are willing to pay a premium for the following features: 

**1) Living Area** - The larger the ground living area, the higher the predicted sale price of the house. Features like the number of cars that a garage can fit is also a key factor influencing sale price positively. 

**2) Overall Quality** - The overall quality and external quality of the house are strong predictor of price. The better the quality, the higher the predicted sale price. Houses with exposed basements could also fetch higher prices, likely because they could be more well-ventilated. 

**3) Location** - Sale price for houses in certain neighborhoods like Northridge Heights, Stone Brook and Northridge, tend to be predicted higher. On the other hand, sale price for houses in neighborhoods like Edwards, North Ames, Old Town and Gilbert tend to be predicted lower. 

**4) Property Age** - Unsurprisingly, sale price for newer houses are predicted to be higher. This is especially so for 1-storey houses that are built after 1946. 

**5) Housing Type** - Generally, houses built after 1946 are predicted to have higher sale price, except for 1 or 2-storey Planned Unit Developments (PUD). 



Brokers can also advise prospective home sellers looking to increase the value of his or her house to do the following:

1) Remodel their house by expanding the living area and garage size and incorporating exposed basement

2) Improve overall and exterior quality of their house through renovation 
    
By taking into account certain features of a home that home buyers are looking for, brokers can also use the model to advise home buyers if the budget they have in mind is sufficient. 

### Model Limitations and Future Steps : 

The model is not generalizable to other cities, given that each city tends to differ in terms of external factors like geographical features, weather or the economic climate, etc.

The sale prices are only accurate to a certain extent due to the lack of recent sales data. A real-time machine-learning model with access to a continuous flow of transactional data would be necessary to keep the model updated. Data collection could be improved to deal with the missing data fields upfront. 

As location is one of the top feature, the data collection of the proximities of amenities (such as schools, supermarkets and restaurants) could be included to further narrow down the neighbourhood features that has a high correlation with the sale prices of properties.

## Data Used in Analysis





### Datasets:
* [`train.csv`](./datasets/train.csv): Raw training data for the model
* [`test.csv`](./datasets/test.csv): Raw testing data for the model
* [`train_clean.csv`](./datasets/train_clean.csv): Cleaned training data for the model
* [`test_clean.csv`](./datasets/test_clean.csv): Cleaned testing data for the model
* [`train_final.csv`](./datasets/train_final.csv): Final training data for the model
* [`test_final.csv`](./datasets/test_final.csv): Final testing data for the model

### Data Dictionary : 
* [`AmesHousing.txt`](http://jse.amstat.org/v19n3/decock/DataDocumentation.txt)

